JACC: CASE REPORTS                                                                                                          VOL. 30, NO. 18, 2025

ª 2025 THE AUTHORS. PUBLISHED BY ELSEVIER ON BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN

COLLEGE OF CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION. THIS IS AN OPEN ACCESS ARTICLE UNDER

THE CC BY-NC-ND LICENSE (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).




HEART FAILURE AND CARDIOMYOPATHIES

CLINICAL CASE




Isolated Atrial Myocarditis With
Atrial Standstill
Christopher Mann, MD,a Robert Schönbauer, MD,a Michael Gottsauner-Wolf, MD,a Irene M. Lang, MD,a
Martin Hülsmann, MD,a Dietrich Beitzke, MD,b Jutta Bergler-Klein, MD,a Christian Hengstenberg, MD,a
Christian Gerges, MD, PHD,a,* Thomas A. Zelniker, MD, MSCa,*


   ABSTRACT


   BACKGROUND Myocarditis typically affects ventricles, whereas isolated atrial myocarditis is rare, causing conduction
   abnormalities, atrial standstill, and right heart failure.

   CASE SUMMARY Two weeks after a respiratory infection, a 35-year-old man developed dyspnea, leg edema, and
   bradycardia. Electrocardiogram revealed a narrow QRS escape rhythm without P waves, and N-terminal pro–B-type
   natriuretic peptide was elevated. Echocardiography showed severe right ventricular dysfunction with massive tricuspid
   regurgitation. Cardiac magnetic resonance demonstrated atrial late gadolinium enhancement and mild edema, whereas
   electrophysiological testing conﬁrmed atrial standstill and atrioventricular block.

   DISCUSSION This case highlights isolated atrial myocarditis as a rare cause of atrial dysfunction, marked by postca-
   pillary pulmonary hypertension and prominent V waves, despite normal mitral valves. Rapid atrial ﬁbrosis progression
   resulted in silent atria, conﬁrmed by magnetic resonance imaging and electrophysiology. Further research is required to
   clarify pathophysiology and establish effective management.

   TAKE-HOME MESSAGES Isolated atrial myocarditis is a rare cause of atrial standstill and atrioventricular block.
   Comprehensive multimodality imaging is essential for accurate diagnosis and management. (JACC Case Rep.
   2025;30:104029) © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology
   Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
   by-nc-nd/4.0/).




M              yocarditis typically involves the ventri-
               cles; however, isolated atrial myocarditis
               is an uncommon clinical condition that
has rarely been reported in the literature. 1,2 It can pre-
                                                                           heart failure. Due to its rarity and atypical clinical fea-
                                                                           tures, isolated atrial involvement poses signiﬁcant
                                                                           diagnostic and management challenges. This case
                                                                           report highlights the clinical implications and distinc-
sent with complications, including conduction abnor-                       tive hemodynamic features of isolated atrial myocar-
malities, atrial standstill, and progression to right                      ditis with atrial standstill.




From the aDepartment of Medicine II, Division of Cardiology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; and the bDepartment
of Biomedical Imaging and Image-Guided Therapy, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. *These authors contributed
equally to this work.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information,
visit the Author Center.

Manuscript received February 4, 2025; revised manuscript received March 21, 2025, accepted March 24, 2025.

ISSN 2666-0849                                                                                       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.104029
2            Mann et al                                                                                                  JACC: CASE REPORTS, VOL. 30, NO. 18, 2025

             Isolated Atrial Myocarditis With Atrial Standstill                                                                                    JULY 9, 2025:104029




ABBREVIATIONS                          CASE PRESENTATION
AND ACRONYMS
                                                                                                      TAKE-HOME MESSAGES

                                       A 35-year-old White man presented to the                        Isolated atrial myocarditis is a rare clinical
AV = atrioventricular
                                       emergency department with dyspnea on mild                        entity that can lead to complications,
hs-TnT = high-sensitivity                                                                               including conduction abnormalities, atrial
                                       exertion (NYHA functional class III), leg
troponin T
                                       edema, and abdominal pain. He denied                             standstill, and rapid progression to right
                                                                                                        heart failure.
                            experiencing chest pain or dizziness. Two weeks
                                                                                                       Comprehensive diagnostic evaluation,
                            prior, he reported symptoms consistent with a viral
                                                                                                        including cardiac magnetic resonance and
                            infection but decided to proceed with a planned trip.
                                                                                                        electrophysiological testing, is crucial for
                            However, the progression of his symptoms led him to                         accurate diagnosis and localization of
                            return early and seek medical attention. His medical                        ﬁbrosis.
                            history included ulcerative colitis, which had been                        Postcapillary pulmonary hypertension with
                            well controlled with mesalazine, and a history of                           prominent V waves in the absence of mitral
                            tobacco use.                                                                valve abnormalities may be distinctive
                                                                                                        hemodynamic hallmarks of isolated atrial
                            INVESTIGATION                                                               involvement.


                            On physical examination, notable ﬁndings included
                            peripheral edema in the lower extremities and                           (reference range: #125 pg/mL) and a high-sensitivity
                            bradycardia with a heart rate of 42 beats/min. The                      troponin T (hs-TnT) level of 31 ng/L (reference
                            electrocardiogram demonstrated the absence of P                         range: #14 ng/L). Mild elevations in liver enzymes
                            waves with a narrow QRS escape rhythm (Figure 1).                       and inﬂammatory markers were also noted. Trans-
                            Laboratory ﬁndings showed an elevated N-terminal                        thoracic echocardiography showed a normally sized
                            pro–B-type natriuretic peptide level of 432 pg/mL                       left ventricle with preserved systolic function and




                               F I G U R E 1 Initial ECG




                               Initial ECG with an absence of P waves and narrow QRS complex with an escape rhythm at a bradycardic rate of 42 beats/min.
                               ECG ¼ electrocardiogram.
JACC: CASE REPORTS, VOL. 30, NO. 18, 2025                                                                                               Mann et al         3
JULY 9, 2025:104029                                                                               Isolated Atrial Myocarditis With Atrial Standstill




                                                               F I G U R E 2 Transthoracic Echocardiography Performed at Admission
mild mitral regurgitation. However, the left atrium
and right ventricle were dilated, with evidence of
pressure overload (D-sign), impaired right ventricular
systolic function, and severe tricuspid regurgitation.
The estimated systolic pulmonary artery pressure was
elevated at 58 mm Hg (Figure 2). Given the clinical
presentation and ﬁndings, a pulmonary embolism
was initially suspected. The D-dimer level was
markedly     elevated    at   2.94   mg/mL       (reference
range: <0.5 m g/mL). However, computed tomography
pulmonary angiography ruled out pulmonary embo-
lism and instead revealed a dilated right ventricle,
bilateral pleural effusions, and contrast agent reﬂux
into the hepatic veins. To exclude the possibility of a
right ventricular infarction, coronary computed to-
mography angiography was performed but showed
only minimal stenosis of the proximal left anterior
descending artery.
  Right heart catheterization revealed a markedly
elevated V-wave, reaching 65 mm Hg in the pulmo-
nary arterial wedge pressure tracing without clearly
deﬁnable A waves (Figure 3). This exceptionally high
V-wave extended visibly into the pulmonary artery
tracing, suggesting passive upstream pressure trans-
mission of elevated left atrial pressure. Further he-
modynamic      assessment     showed        elevated    mean
pulmonary artery pressure at 35 mm Hg and mean
pulmonary arterial wedge pressure at 28 mm Hg. The
cardiac output was 5.8 L/min, resulting in a pulmo-
nary vascular resistance that was normal at 1.2 WU,
consistent with isolated postcapillary pulmonary
hypertension associated with left heart disease.
  Given the signiﬁcant V-wave elevation, mitral
disease was strongly suspected. However, initial
transthoracic echocardiography revealed only mild
mitral regurgitation, prompting further investigation.
Transesophageal echocardiography was subsequently
performed, conﬁrming the transthoracic echocardi-
ography ﬁndings and demonstrating only mild mitral
regurgitation, effectively ruling out severe mitral
valve pathology as the primary cause of the pro-
nounced V-wave. A silent left atrium was considered
as a rare cause of the giant V waves. Hence, cardiac
magnetic resonance was performed, revealing normal
left and right ventricular function but borderline
elevated T 1 and T 2 times suggestive of mild myocar-
dial edema. Late gadolinium enhancement was
observed in the left atrium, consistent with ﬁbrotic
changes,    whereas     no    signiﬁcant     scarring    was
observed in the ventricles (Figure 4). Based on the
                                                               Transthoracic echocardiography performed at admission (A) with no visible A-wave in the
presence of 2 of 3 Lake Louise criteria (late gadolin-
                                                               mitral inﬂow Doppler image. (B) Right ventricle is dilated and shows severe systolic
ium   enhancement       and   myocardial      edema)     and
                                                               dysfunction with massive tricuspid regurgitation. (C) Estimated systolic pulmonary artery
elevated hs-TnT concentrations, a clinical diagnosis           pressure is 58 mm Hg.
of myocarditis was made.3 Notably, in this case,
4   Mann et al                                                                                                     JACC: CASE REPORTS, VOL. 30, NO. 18, 2025

    Isolated Atrial Myocarditis With Atrial Standstill                                                                                        JULY 9, 2025:104029




                      F I G U R E 3 Right Heart Catheterization




                      Right heart catheterization displaying markedly elevated V waves in the PAWP. The tracing also demonstrates upstream pressure transmission
                      to the PA. PA ¼ pulmonary artery; PAWP ¼ pulmonary arterial wedge pressure waveform.



                                                                                             myocarditis, at least in the postacute phase, appeared
                      F I G U R E 4 Cardiac Magnetic Resonance
                                                                                             to be conﬁned to the atria.

                                                                                             MANAGEMENT

                                                                                             The patient was treated with furosemide and epler-
                                                                                             enone, leading to symptomatic improvement and a
                                                                                             decline in cardiac biomarker levels. Four days after
                                                                                             admission, he developed dizziness and was managed
                                                                                             with isoprenaline, which stabilized his heart rate. Due
                                                                                             to a nonfunctioning atrioventricular (AV) node, a
                                                                                             cardiac resynchronization therapy pacemaker was
                                                                                             implanted because His bundle pacing was not avail-
                                                                                             able at that time. During the implantation, we
                                                                                             attempted atrial pacing at multiple sites; however, all
                                                                                             efforts were unsuccessful. Postinterventional trans-
                                                                                             thoracic echocardiography showed the absence of an
                                                                                             A-wave in the mitral inﬂow signal, a mildly reduced
                                                                                             right ventricular systolic function, and massive
                                                                                             tricuspid regurgitation.

                                                                                             OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP

                                                                                             During his hospital stay, the patient lost a total 7 kg
                      Cardiac magnetic resonance showing late gadolinium                     and was discharged in a recompensated state. Two
                      enhancement in the left atrium (red arrow, consistent with             weeks later, the patient was electively readmitted for
                      ﬁbrotic changes.                                                       an electrophysiological examination to evaluate the
JACC: CASE REPORTS, VOL. 30, NO. 18, 2025                                                                                                                  Mann et al     5
JULY 9, 2025:104029                                                                                                  Isolated Atrial Myocarditis With Atrial Standstill



   F I G U R E 5 Electrograms During Electrophysiological Examination




   (A) Electrograms demonstrating septal pacing attempts via a pentaspline multipolar mapping catheter. Despite successful capture of the local
   septal atrial myocardium, as seen on Penta 9-10, pacing consistently resulted in complete atrioventricular block. (B) A Decapolar mapping
   catheter (CS) (Abbott) was inserted in the coronary sinus with the proximal bipole (CS 9-10) positioned at the coronary sinus ostium. The
   underlying rhythm is a junctional escape rhythm with narrow QRS complexes on the surface electrocardiogram. The CS shows only far-ﬁeld
   ventricular signals without evidence of atrial activity. Additionally, pacing from the proximal CS bipole (CS 9-10) does not result in atrial
   capture.
6          Mann et al                                                                                          JACC: CASE REPORTS, VOL. 30, NO. 18, 2025

           Isolated Atrial Myocarditis With Atrial Standstill                                                                         JULY 9, 2025:104029




                                                                                          potential beneﬁt of relocating the atrial lead. Labo-
    F I G U R E 6 Follow-Up Transthoracic Echocardiography Performed 6 Weeks
    Postdischarge
                                                                                          ratory ﬁndings showed an hs-TnT level of 11 ng/L and
                                                                                          an N-terminal pro–B-type natriuretic peptide level of
                                                                                          95 pg/mL. Electrophysiological mapping of the right
                                                                                          atrium revealed a silent right atrium, with only a
                                                                                          small atrial septal capture and complete AV block
                                                                                          (Figure 5A). Furthermore, coronary sinus pacing
                                                                                          showed no electrical response (Figure 5B). Conse-
                                                                                          quently, repositioning the atrial lead was deemed
                                                                                          unnecessary because septal stimulation resulted in
                                                                                          no meaningful activity of the atria and complete AV
                                                                                          block. Given a CHA 2DS 2-VA score of 1 (due to
                                                                                          atherosclerosis) in the absence of atrial activity,
                                                                                          anticoagulation was deferred, with plans for interval
                                                                                          reassessment. At a clinical follow-up visit 6 weeks
                                                                                          later, transthoracic echocardiography continued to
                                                                                          show no left atrial activity. However, the right
                                                                                          ventricle was only mildly dilated, with normal right
                                                                                          ventricular systolic function, mild tricuspid regurgi-
                                                                                          tation, and normal systolic pulmonary artery pressure
                                                                                          (Figure 6). One month later, device interrogation
                                                                                          conﬁrmed 100% biventricular pacing.


                                                                                          DISCUSSION

                                                                                          This case report describes a rare presentation of iso-
                                                                                          lated atrial myocarditis with atrial standstill leading
                                                                                          to AV block and right ventricular dysfunction in a
                                                                                          35-year-old man. The rapid progression of the disease
                                                                                          and unusual distribution of ﬁbrosis conﬁned to the
                                                                                          atria    make       this    case   particularly    noteworthy.
                                                                                          Myocarditis typically involves the ventricles and can
                                                                                          lead     to    ventricular    arrhythmias     or   conduction
                                                                                          abnormalities, and heart failure. 2,4 In this case, the
                                                                                          ﬁbrosis was exclusively conﬁned to the atria, with the
                                                                                          ventricles completely unaffected. However, because
                                                                                          only postmyocarditis changes were observed, it
                                                                                          remains uncertain whether the acute phase of
                                                                                          myocarditis was also restricted to the atria. Isolated
                                                                                          atrial myocarditis has been rarely described in the
                                                                                          literature and has been linked to giant cell myocar-
                                                                                          ditis.1 An endomyocardial biopsy was not performed
                                                                                          in this case because cardiac magnetic resonance did
                                                                                          not indicate active myocarditis, and a biopsy would
                                                                                          not have inﬂuenced the therapeutic approach.
                                                                                            The rapid progression of myocarditis to ﬁbrosis
                                                                                          was another striking feature of this case. Despite the
                                                                                          patient’s recent viral infection and subsequent
                                                                                          symptoms, ﬁbrosis developed unusually quickly,
                                                                                          leading to atrial dysfunction and complete, irrevers-
                                                                                          ible AV block. Such rapid progression of atrial
    (A) Right ventricle is mildly dilated but shows normal systolic function. Tricuspid   myocarditis to ﬁbrosis is atypical and considered
    regurgitation is reduced, and (B) estimated systolic pulmonary artery pressure has
                                                                                          rare.5 Although atrial ﬁbrosis typically presents with
    improved to 29 mm Hg. (C) Left atrial activity remains absent.
                                                                                          atrial        ﬁbrillation    or    other     supraventricular
JACC: CASE REPORTS, VOL. 30, NO. 18, 2025                                                                                                                            Mann et al     7
JULY 9, 2025:104029                                                                                                            Isolated Atrial Myocarditis With Atrial Standstill




arrhythmias,1 this patient demonstrated a rare pre-                                  and antiﬁbrotic therapies, including mineralocorti-
sentation of atrial inactivity in electrophysiological                               coid       receptor       antagonists,            renin-angiotensin-
testing (silent atria).6,7 Another distinctive feature of                            aldosterone system inhibitors, and sodium-glucose
this case was the presence of prominent V waves,                                     cotransporter-2 inhibitors.
despite the absence of mitral valve abnormalities.
                                                                                     CONCLUSIONS
The rapid progression of atrial ﬁbrosis ultimately
contributed to the development of right heart failure.
                                                                                     This case of isolated atrial myocarditis highlights an
The absence of other contributing factors (eg, pul-
                                                                                     unusual distribution of postmyocarditis scarring
monary embolism) suggests a pivotal role of atrial
                                                                                     conﬁned to the atria, rapid progression to ﬁbrosis,
dysfunction in the pathogenesis of right heart failure,
                                                                                     and resulting silent atria phenomenon with atrial
likely mediated by acute-onset postcapillary pulmo-
                                                                                     standstill. Further research is necessary to under-
nary hypertension caused by increased left atrial
                                                                                     stand the pathophysiology and establish effective
pressure.
                                                                                     management strategies for this rare condition.
    This case highlights several important clinical im-
plications: First, isolated atrial myocarditis should be
                                                                                     FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
considered as a rare differential diagnosis in patients
presenting with unexplained AV block, particularly in
                                                                                     The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to
the presence of recent viral infection or other sys-                                 the contents of this paper to disclose.
temic symptoms. Comprehensive diagnostic evalua-
tion, including cardiac magnetic resonance and
electrophysiological testing, is crucial for accurate                                ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE:                               Dr Christian
diagnosis and localization of ﬁbrosis. Postcapillary                                 Gerges, Division of Cardiology, Medical University of
pulmonary hypertension with prominent V waves in                                     Vienna, Waehringer Guertel 18-20, 1090 Vienna,
the absence of mitral valve abnormalities may be a                                   Austria. E-mail: Christian.gerges@meduniwien.ac.at.
hallmark of isolated atrial involvement. Timely                                      OR Dr Thomas A. Zelniker, Division of Cardiology,
management with diuretics can result in signiﬁcant                                   Medical University of Vienna, Waehringer Guertel
clinical improvement. Although evidence is limited,                                  18-20,      1090      Vienna,       Austria.        E-mail:       thomas.
consideration should also be given to anticoagulation                                zelniker@meduniwien.ac.at.



REFERENCES

1. Larsen BT, Maleszewski JJ, Edwards WD, et al.           4. Tschöpe C, Ammirati E, Bozkurt B, et al.         Pacing   Clin   Electrophysiol. 1993;16(11):2196–
Atrial giant cell myocarditis. Circulation. 2013;127(1):   Myocarditis and inﬂammatory cardiomyopathy:         2201.
39–47.                                                     current evidence and future directions. Nat Rev
                                                                                                               7. Prabhu MA, Srinivas Prasad BV, Thajudeen A,
                                                           Cardiol. 2021;18(3):169–193.
2. Sagar S, Liu PP, Cooper LT. Myocarditis. Lancet.                                                            Namboodiri N. Persistent atrial standstill in
2012;379(9817):738–747.                                    5. Tang Y, Qi L, Xu L, et al. Atrial giant          acute myocarditis. Indian Pediatr. 2016;53(2):
                                                           cell myocarditis with preserved left ventricular    162–164.
3. Ferreira VM, Schulz-Menger J, Holmvang G,
                                                           function: a case report and literature review.
et al. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance in non-
                                                           J Cardiothorac Surg. 2023;18(1):232.
ischemic myocardial inﬂammation: expert recom-
mendations. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;72(24):3158–           6. Straumanis JP, Wiles HB, Case CL. Resolution     KEY WORDS cardiac magnetic resonance,
3176.                                                      of atrial standstill in a child with myocarditis.   cardiomyopathy, right-sided catheterization
