JACC: CASE REPORTS                                                                                                      VOL. 31, NO. 6, 2026

ª 2026 THE AUTHORS. PUBLISHED BY ELSEVIER ON BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN

COLLEGE OF CARDIOLOGY FOUNDATION. THIS IS AN OPEN ACCESS ARTICLE UNDER

THE CC BY-NC-ND LICENSE (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).




CORONARY, PERIPHERAL, AND STRUCTURAL INTERVENTIONS

THE FOUR CORNERS: CLINICAL VIGNETTE CORNER




Coronary Pseudoaneurysm and
Stent Disruption Caused by
Infective Endocarditis
Daisuke Kanda, MD, PHD, Nobuhiro Ito, MD, Mitsuru Ohishi, MD, PHD


   ABSTRACT


   IMAGES Intravascular imaging (optical coherence tomography and intravascular ultrasound) demonstrating coronary
   pseudoaneurysm and stent disruption.

   CASE SUMMARY A 65-year-old man undergoing hemodialysis for diabetic nephropathy developed methicillin-
   resistant Staphylococcus aureus infective endocarditis complicated by coronary pseudoaneurysm and stent disruption,
   resulting in cardiac tamponade. Intravascular imaging confirmed the complete destruction of the arterial wall.
   Emergency covered stent implantation and pericardiocentesis stabilized the patient, followed by a multidisciplinary
   treatment approach, including prolonged antibiotics and surgical source control, leading to survival.

   TAKE-HOME MESSAGE Timely imaging-guided diagnosis and a stepwise multidisciplinary strategy were lifesaving in
   this extremely rare and complex case. (JACC Case Rep. 2026;31:106337) © 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier on
   behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
   (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).




A          65-year-old man on hemodialysis for diabetic nephropathy, with a history of leadless pacemaker im-
           plantation and prior percutaneous coronary intervention with drug-eluting stenting of the left ante-
           rior descending artery for stable angina (Figure 1A), developed methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus bacteremia complicated by infective endocarditis.
   During intravenous antibiotic therapy for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia, he
developed chest pain. Echocardiography revealed new left ventricular wall motion abnormalities and


  TAKE-HOME MESSAGES

  • This report describes an extremely rare and complex presentation of a coronary pseudoaneurysm and stent
     disruption complicated by infective endocarditis in a patient with multiple comorbidities (diabetes, end-stage
     renal disease, and prior device implantation).
  • Survival was achieved through prompt intravascular imaging–guided diagnosis and a multidisciplinary,
     stepwise treatment strategy including pericardiocentesis, covered stent placement, prolonged antibiotics, and
     surgical source control.




From the Department of Cardiovascular Medicine and Hypertension, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences,
Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, Japan.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’
institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more
information, visit the Author Center.

Manuscript received August 13, 2025; revised manuscript received October 1, 2025, accepted November 5, 2025.

ISSN 2666-0849                                                                                    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.106337
2          Kanda et al                                                                                                        JACC: CASE REPORTS, VOL. 31, NO. 6, 2026

           Coronary Pseudoaneurysm With Infective Endocarditis                                                                                   FEBRUARY 11, 2026:106337




    F I G U R E 1 Multimodality Imaging and Covered Stent Management of a Coronary Pseudoaneurysm With Infective Endocarditis




    (A) Baseline angiography showing prior drug-eluting stent in the left anterior descending artery. (B to D) Coronary angiography after pericardiocentesis demonstrating
    stent disruption with a rapidly enlarging pseudoaneurysm. (E to J) Optical coherence tomography showing loss of the three-layered structure, consistent with a
    pseudoaneurysm. (H) Intravascular ultrasound confirming pseudoaneurysm formation. (K) Covered stent deployed to seal the lesion. (L) Final angiography confirming
    complete exclusion of the pseudoaneurysm. (M) Yellowish, turbid pericardial fluid obtained during emergency pericardiocentesis. (N) Surgical exploration of the
    leadless pacemaker revealing vegetation.




                         pericardial effusion. The patient rapidly developed hemodynamic instability owing to cardiac tamponade and
                         cardiogenic shock. Laboratory tests revealed a high inflammatory response with disseminated intravascular
                         coagulation, suggesting multiorgan dysfunction.
                            Following emergency pericardiocentesis, coronary angiography revealed disruption of the previously
                         implanted stent and the presence of a rapidly enlarging coronary pseudoaneurysm (Figures 1B to 1D).
                            Optical coherence tomography (Figures 1E to 1J) and intravascular ultrasound (Figure 1H) revealed complete
                         destruction of the arterial wall and loss of the normal 3-layer architecture, consistent with pseudoaneurysm.
                         The pseudoaneurysm likely resulted from infectious degradation of the vessel wall, facilitated by septic
                         microembolism or direct extension from bacteremia. Given the imminent risk of rupture, a covered coronary
                         stent was deployed to seal the lesion (Figure 1K). Final angiography (Figure 1L) confirmed complete exclusion
                         of the pseudoaneurysm. Yellowish, turbid pericardial fluid was aspirated immediately before percutaneous
                         coronary intervention, further indicating a systemic infection (Figure 1M). After drainage and covered stent
                         implantation, his vital signs and laboratory marker levels improved. The patient subsequently underwent
                         coronary artery bypass grafting, leadless pacemaker removal, and epicardial pacemaker implantation. Surgical
                         exploration of the leadless pacemaker revealed visible vegetation, suggesting device involvement (Figure 1N).
                         He received a total of 4 months of hospitalization, including approximately 2 months of antibiotic therapy,
                         and was eventually discharged home in stable condition. Coronary pseudoaneurysms caused by infective
                         endocarditis are rare and life-threatening and lack standardized management protocols. 1 Surgical manage-
                         ment of active infective endocarditis with impending pseudoaneurysm rupture can be extremely challenging
                         and is often associated with poor outcomes, particularly when infection control is inadequate. 2 Therefore,
                         timely diagnosis enabled by intravascular imaging and subsequent urgent treatment with covered stent
JACC: CASE REPORTS, VOL. 31, NO. 6, 2026                                                                                                            Kanda et al   3
FEBRUARY 11, 2026:106337                                                                                    Coronary Pseudoaneurysm With Infective Endocarditis




implantation proved critical for patient survival in this setting of impending rupture. This case highlights that
even in the most complex clinical settings, rapid diagnosis and a stepwise multidisciplinary approach can be
lifesaving.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank the staff of the Department of Cardiovascular Medicine and
Hypertension for their assistance.

FUNDING SUPPORT AND AUTHOR DISCLOSURES

The authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to the contents of this paper to disclose.



ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Dr Daisuke Kanda, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima 890-8520, Japan.
E-mail: kanchan@m3.kufm.kagoshima-u.ac.jp.



REFERENCES

1. Ramakumar V, Thakur A, Abdulkader RS, et al.   2. Pisani A, Braham W, Borghese O. Coronary
Coronary stent infections - A systematic review   stent infection: are patients amenable to surgical   KEY WORDS endocarditis, imaging,
and meta-analysis. Cardiovasc Revasc Med.         treatment? A systematic review and narrative         percutaneous coronary intervention
2023;54:16–24.                                    synthesis. Int J Cardiol. 2021;344:40–46.
